In experiments with tobacco tissue cultured on White's modified medium
(basal meditmi hi Tnhles 1 and 2) supplemenk'd with kiticthi and hidoleacctic
acid, a slrikin^' four- lo (ive-told intTease iu yield was ohtaitu-d within a
three to Tour week j^rowth period on addition of an aqtteotis exlrarl of tobacco
leaves (Fi^'ures 1 and 2). Subse(iueutly it was found Ihiit this jnoniotiou oi'
f^rowih was due mainly though nol entirely to inorj^auic rather than organic
con.stitttenls in the extract.
In the isolation of Rrowth factors from plant tissues and other sources
inorj^'anic salts are fre(|uently carried along with fhe organic fraclioits. When
tissue cultures are used for bioassays, therefore, il is necessary lo lake into
account increases in growth which may result from nutrient elements or
other known constituents of the medium which may he present in the te.st
materials. To minimize interference trom rontaminaitis of this type, an
altempt has heen made to de\eh)p a nieditmi with such adequate supplies of
all re(iuired tnineral nutrients and cotntnott orgattic cottslitueitls that no
apprecial»le change in growth rate or yield will result from the inlroduclion
of additional amounts in the range ordinarily expected to be present in tnaterials
to be assayed.
As a point of referetice for this work some of the culture media in mc)st
common current use will he cotisidered briefly. For ease of comparis4)n Iheir
mineral compositions are listed in Tables 1 and 2. White's nutrient .solution,
designed originally for excised root cultures, was based on Uspeuski and
Uspetiskaia's medium for algae and Trelease and Trelease's micronutrieni
solution. This medium also was employed successfully in the original cttltivation
of callus from the tobacco Iiybrid Nicotiana gtauca x A', tanijadorffii, atitl
as further modified by White in 194^^ and by others it has been used for the cultivation of various tissues frotn numerous .species (See Gautheret's 1959
compilation). Gautheret's meditnn (1939j was devised by combinlit^' a twice
diluted Knop's niacronutrient .solution with a slightly modified Bcrthelot's
micronutrieut solution. Hildcbrandt. Riker. and Dufif^ar (1940) employed the
trianfi;ulation terhnique to itnprove on Wiiitc's incditttn i'or the ciillivatiou of
specific tissues. They reported two new tortuulae lincltided iti Tahles 1 ;uid 2)
which they desiytuUed as optimal for cultures ol the ahove hybrid tobacco
calhts and for sunflower crown f^all caMus respectively. These media, accordiu}i
to Burkholder and Nickell (1949). were still unsuitable for citllivation of
virtis-indticed tumor tissues. By employitij; the triangulation technique in
initial trials and then by testing .serial concentrations of each clement indepctidently
ni the others, these ijtvestigalors devised still another formula
liased on the medintn for sutifliiwer tissue by Hildebrandt ct al.. anrl wbich
tbey reported as more stntable for Rttmex tissue. Heller (19531 bas tuade
detailed studies of tbe mineral requirements in cultures of carrot and Virgltiia
creeper. He first induced defi< iencies of several of the eleuienls by repeated
transfers of tbe cultttres to liquid media lackinj^ Ihe element in qtiestion and
then rcintr(Khi(('d the clement in serial concctitrations to .select satisfactory
levels. For the most part tbe level of each element was varied only in combinations
in wbich the respective levels of all other nutrients were kept
unchnnscd. In comparative tests. Heller found his medium to H've two to
three times greater yield.s than White's or (iaiitherefs media which were
employed as controls. The nutrictit .soltttiou devised more recetitly hy Nitsch
and Nitscb (1956) for Joru.saletn artichoke is based on the hest estimate of
available literature for cultures of Ibis species and subsequent modification.