It is challenging to find a non-trivial and useful annotation task that a human can perform and a machine can learn from human-generated data. We believe that we have identified five dimensions of human judgment tasks that are machine-learnable and do have practical implications. Our belief that the tasks are machine-learnable is based on the relatively high level of agreement among untrained annotators, (as shown in Tables 4, 5), who used only the guidelines. Annotation tasks can vary significantly in terms of difficulty: for example, a survey by Saracevic [43] indicated that agreement among human judges varied between 40% and 75% for different tasks. Our results of inter-annotator agreement of 70–80% (see Tables 4 &5) indicate that our annotation problem is relatively easy for the human annotators, which we expect to translate into learnability by machine learning algorithms. Additional support for learnability comes from the observation that clues as to ratings on any of the five dimensions often come in the form of specific words or phrases that occur in the annotated text. This is similar to the sentiment analysis task [37–40] where machine learning has given good results [44]. That said, sentiment analysis work [45, 46] also suggests that learning performance depends on topic, domain, and temporality. Thus, conclusions from our work, in which we use biomedical text as a training set, will likely be limited to the sublanguage of biomedicine and not equally applicable to scientific text as a whole.

The variability in annotation agreement along the different dimensions, as summarized in Tables 2 and 3, suggests that categorization along these dimensions is not all of the same difficulty. We were surprised to find that rating of evidence is among the most challenging tasks. While identifying citations (evidence level 2) is an almost mechanical task, there are many subtle ways in which words are used to indicate that a result is a consequence of the new research being reported in a paper (evidence level 3). Similarly, there are many ways to support a statement by eluding to previous work with no specific citation (evidence level 1). Analogous remarks apply to the rating of certainty. For the distinction between Methodology versus Science or General subject matter, we expect a limited set of clue words and phrases to be useful. We expect that distinction between General subject matter versus Science or Methodology may be the most challenging of all the tasks because of the open-ended nature of General subject matter. On a positive note, General subject matter is less common in scientific research articles. While we may therefore expect fewer training examples of General focus, it may make success on this one sub-task less critical to our overall project.

Some insight can be gained from our data about training of annotators. Obviously, a good understanding of the English language and experience in reading scientific literature are important for performing the annotation task as prescribed in our guidelines. It is surprising that even with these skills, (arguably possessed by all 12 annotators), some annotators still performed poorly, as illustrated in Tables 4 and 5. These results strongly indicate that careful quality control is essential, and that poor performance calls for feedback, instruction, and retesting with either resolution of the difficulty or discontinuance from the task. To support such measures, we plan to first train the judges, and then have each sentence annotated independently by three different judges, as well as having different triples of judges assigned to different sentences.

Conclusion

We have presented guidelines for the annotation of text that have sufficient generality to transcend the confines of a narrow subject area, while supporting practical mining of text for factual information. We have identified five qualitative dimensions that we believe are useful in this respect: focus, polarity, certainty, evidence, and directionality. We define these dimensions and describe the guidelines we have developed for annotating text with regard to them. Our initial work investigating the reliability of such annotations supports the feasibility of the approach.

Our ultimate goal is the annotation of 10,000 sentences, taken from diverse sources in the biomedical research literature. We believe that with triplicate annotations this will allow the training of machine learning algorithms to perform the annotation task at a useful level of accuracy. Both the annotation and the training of machine learning algorithms are currently ongoing. Should they prove successful, we foresee several areas of application. First, annotation of a large volume of literature and characterization of the literature along the dimensions proposed. This may shed light on the composition of different parts of research papers and even define the characteristics of different genres of biomedical research literature. Another potential application is to combine these annotations with semantic analysis of text to produce a text-mining tool. For example, our annotations could guide entity recognition applied to subject-verb-object triples towards statements that are likely to be highly reliable, as they are supported by evidence or stated in the affirmative with high confidence. Such techniques might also prove helpful to a question answering system and even to a document retrieval system. The scientific literature is vast and there is a wide variety of potential reasons for accessing it. One investigator may wish to obtain validated facts about a particular gene, thus looking for statements of high Certainty about it. A second investigator may desire to examine contradicting statements regarding the expression of a gene; in this case statements mentioning the same gene but with opposite Polarity and/or opposite Direction/Trend are important. A third investigator may wish to examine uncertain hypotheses regarding this same gene, which would involve looking for statements with a low Certainty level. Such statements may stimulate his thinking and lead him in new research directions. In fact we suggest that contradictions and speculations in the literature are likely to prove a fruitful source of new hypotheses. All of this is territory yet to be explored.

Methods

The annotation guidelines presented here evolved through several iterations over a period of more than a year. We repeatedly tested and revised the guidelines by independently annotating text ranging in style from reviews to research publications, from several biomedical domains, and comparing our results. This resulted in the guidelines in their current form, along with appendices containing numerous examples illustrating the principles laid out in the guidelines.

Our general aim is to identify information-bearing fragments within scientific text, in order to substantiate our knowledge about important biomedical entities and processes. Furthermore, we would like to differentiate these informative fragments from non-informative ones automatically, as well as to distinguish among several types of informative fragments. To simplify the task we typically annotate at the sentence level where possible, but complex sentences are annotated as needed at the level of subsentential fragments. Such fragmentation is necessary to capture changes in focus, polarity, certainty, evidence, or trend that may, and frequently do, occur within a single sentence. For example the sentence: "Furthermore, Bax insertion into the MOM of Myc-/- cells appeared to be efficient, which would not be expected for a fall-back pathway." exhibits a change in polarity in the final clause. It would be necessary to fragment it at this point in order to capture the fact that two different polarities exist in the sentence. The only rule for fragmentation is that it occurs only when there is a change in value along any of the five annotation dimensions.

We are currently pursuing two related sub-goals: 1) to manually annotate a sizable corpus, and 2) to use this corpus to build and train text-classifiers. To approach the first subtask, annotation of a biomedical corpus, we characterize text fragments along the following dimensions: