In this paper, we consider another physical mechanism that is capable of computation, namely NMR spectroscopy. This approach is based on the fact that the spins in each molecule of a liquid sample are largely isolated from the spins in all other molecules. As a result, each molecule is effectively an independent QC. Via radio-frequency electromagnetic pulses, it is straightforward to manipulate each of the spins in every molecule identically across the sample, as in a synchronous, single-instruction parallel machine. Similarly, what one observes in an NMR spectrum is the sum of certain observables over all the molecules in the sample, which is proportional to the ensemble average expectation value of the observable. Thus, such a machine performs a calculation using quantum parallelism at the molecular level and then amplifies its results to the macroscopic level via a form of classical parallelism. We call a computer based on this principle an ensemble QC (EQC).

Other researchers have proposed implementing an atomic-scale QC by NMR and analogous physical mechanisms (e.g., refs. 8–11). The reason a macroscopic version has not previously been pursued lies in the fact that the magnetic moments of the individual spins are very small, so that even with superconducting magnets, it is not possible to perfectly align the spins at temperatures above ˜1 mK. This in turn makes it impossible to prepare a liquid sample in a pure state, in which the spin states of all the molecules are identical. We have solved this problem by introducing a new concept into NMR spectroscopy, called pseudo-pure states, the behavior of which is similar in many respects to a pure state. In particular, they can be described by a type of spinor, which evolves via unitary transformations under the Hamiltonians of NMR and whose expectation values are easily obtained from the corresponding ensemble-average expectation values. We call these spinors pseudo-spinors, to emphasize the fact that their physical interpretation differs from that of the spinors that describe isolated spin systems.

Such an NMR computer can be programmed electronically much like a QC, but it can be implemented using macroscopic liquid samples at room temperature and pressure like a DNA computer. In principle, it can also trade an exponential increase in the amount of time required to solve intractable combinatorial problems, including NP-complete problems, for an exponential increase in the size (physical dimensions) of the sample on which it operates. Preliminary experiments that validate this novel approach to computing have already been performed (12). Although scaling it to problems beyond the reach of conventional computers promises to be very difficult, the theoretical implications of such a machine are intriguing, and its general principles may prove more broadly applicable. Because these principles are derived from several very different fields, an elementary exposition is needed to provide a common knowledge base for future interdisciplinary research. That is the purpose of the present paper.

Quantum Computing and Exponential State Spaces
Because of its importance in what follows, we begin with a brief account of how a QC works; more detailed accounts may be found in refs. 10, 11, 13, and 14. A distinctive property of multiparticle quantum systems is that the dimensionality of their state space grows exponentially with the number of particles (15). This is because the Hilbert space for a system of distinguishable particles must be taken as the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces of the individual particles, to model the correlations among them. In particular, if one considers the spin dynamics of a system of n spin 1/2 particles, the Hilbert spaces of which are all of dimension two, the dimension of the Hilbert space of the combined system is 2n. It is for this reason that many researchers have proposed constructing a QC from a system of spin particles, for example, in an ion trap (16).

The vectors (or “wave functions”) in the Hilbert space of a system of spins are called spinors. The standard basis consists of the joint eigenvectors of the total and z-component of the spin angular momentum. The encoding used in quantum computing maps each integer k in the range [0, 2n - 1] to the kth basis element versus a particular ordering of the basis. For a single spin 1/2 particle, the basis consists of the spin “down” (antiparallel to the z-axis) state, which is represented by the vector [1, 0] and is denoted by the “bra” <0|, together with the spin “up” state, which is represented by the vector [0, 1] and is denoted as <1|; the corresponding column vectors are denoted by the “kets” |0> and |1>, respectively. The basis vectors of an n-spin system are formed by taking the tensor or Kronecker products of the basis vectors of its constituent spins in some arbitrary but fixed order. The general definition of the Kronecker product ? of an M × N matrix A with an M' × N' matrix B is the matrix MM' × NN' given by: