Because I grew up with bagels and lox as the centerpiece of every special-occasion brunch, the first breakfast casserole I encountered seemed exotic and exciting.

Tucked amid the soft, custard-soaked bread were bits of browned sausage and onions, flecks of basil and gooey pockets of cheese. Added bonus: Not only could the whole thing be assembled entirely ahead, it was in fact better if you did. The next morning, you could pop it in the oven in your precaffeinated state, let it bake while you showered and set the table, and serve it hot and melty without so much as slicing an onion the morning of the feast.

Even bagels and lox can’t claim that kind of last-minute convenience.
A Good Appetite
Melissa Clark’s weekly cooking column.

    A Timpano That’s Easier to Make and Just as Spectacular
    A Hanukkah Treat (No, Not Latkes) With a Sweet Reminder of Sicily
    Squash Gives This Winter Salad a Satisfying Twist
    Thanksgiving Vegetables Get Freshened Up
    A Big, Poufy Pancake Goes Savory

See More »
Continue reading the main story
Recipes from Cooking

    Buttery Breakfast Casserole

    By melissa clark

Download the new Cooking iPad app
visit the app store to download the new york times ipad cooking app

See more recipes

A breakfast casserole can be as simple or deluxe as you like, but the template stays more or less the same. A basic ratio is one egg to a half-cup of liquid dairy (milk, cream or a combination) to a cup of cubed bread. Substituting yolks for some of the whole eggs will give you a richer custard. Using fewer eggs gives you a firmer casserole that’s easier to slice for serving. And mixing in plenty of grated cheese (about a half-cup per cup of dairy) adds flavor, luscious gooeyness and a scattering of browned bits on the top.
As for the bread, the lighter the loaf, the more ethereal the casserole. Think brioche, challah, good white bread or children-friendly soft whole-wheat (nothing too hearty, seedy or grainy). The more stale and dried out it is, the more custard it can absorb. Many recipes call for drying out fresh bread in a low oven. But if you toast the bread in a very hot oven instead, you’ll both dry it out and give it a deep caramelized flavor.
Continue reading the main story
NYT Food
NYT Food
The Best of Melissa Clark
With a crackling, caramelized brown sugar topping, these custardy slices of French toast resemble cr&#232;me br&#251;l&#233;e. Start them soaking the night before, then pop them in the oven in the morning for one of the most decadent brunches imaginable. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Here, the croutons and cheese are layered directly into the soup pot and broiled. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A breakfast casserole can be as simple or deluxe as you like, but the template stays more or less the same. A basic ratio is one egg to a half-cup of liquid dairy (milk, cream or a combination) to a cup of cubed bread. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A breakfast casserole can be as simple or deluxe as you like, but the template stays more or less the same. A basic ratio is one egg to a half-cup of liquid dairy (milk, cream or a combination) to a cup of cubed bread. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A classic Italian-American Parmesan &#8212; a casserole of fried, breaded meat or eggplant covered with tomato sauce and molten cheese &#8212; is all about balance. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A five-hour braise yields a tender, intense and velvety leg of lamb, soft enough to cut with the edge of a spoon. Carrots and parsnips lend sweetness to the pot, while tomatoes and a handful of chopped green olives add a bracing bite. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times
This dish, inspired by a traditional recipe from the Parsis (a group of Zoroastrians from Persia who settled in India sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries), is possibly one of the most fragrant and vivid casseroles you&#8217;ll ever see. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
You can use any kind of meat to make these dead-simple scaloppine &#8211; veal, turkey, chicken, pork, even beef if you can find pieces thin enough. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
No matter where you bake it, this particular apple pie recipe is a keeper. Gently spiced with cinnamon, tinged with brown sugar and loaded with apple butter, it&#8217;s as deeply flavored as an apple pie can be, all covered with a buttery wide-lattice top crust. (Photo: Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)
Wheels of halvah &#8212; a soft, fudgelike candy made out of sesame paste &#8212; is an iconic sight in Middle Eastern markets. But it&#8217;s also extremely easy to make at home, as long as you have access to a good brand of tahini (the only ingredient should be sesame seeds) and a candy thermometer. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
This mashup of Julia Child recipes, combining elements of her quiche Lorraine and quiche au fromage, then pouring them into a lard-and-butter based pie crust, results in a serious breakfast feast. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Shredding tofu on a box grater before stir-frying gives it a fluffy, light texture, and the smaller pieces readily absorb the complex, earthy mushroom flavor of the sauce. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
You can make this kind of salad with almost any vegetable that won&#8217;t wilt or burn when subjected to a copious slick of oil and a blast of high heat. Broccoli, brussels sprouts, beets, parsnips, sweet potatoes, winter squash and rutabagas all work well. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Pork griot (pronounced gree-oh) is one of Haiti&#8217;s most loved dishes, and it&#8217;s easy to see why. Big chunks of pork shoulder are marinated in citrus and Scotch bonnet chiles, then simmered until very tender before being fried crisp and brown. This recipe departs from the traditional in that instead of frying the meat, it&#8217;s broiled. ( Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Simmering up a pot of curry, with tender chunks of meat suffused with a dark, fragrant curry sauce laced with chiles, fresh ginger and garlic. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
When the meat was cooked and nearly collapsed, I removed it from the pot and simmered the curry sauce until it was thick and velvety. This made the shiny, heady sauce cling to the lamb when I stirred it back in. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Wheels of halvah &#8212; a soft, fudgelike candy made out of sesame paste &#8212; is an iconic sight in Middle Eastern markets. But it&#8217;s also extremely easy to make at home, as long as you have access to a good brand of tahini (the only ingredient should be sesame seeds) and a candy thermometer. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
With a crackling, caramelized brown sugar topping, these custardy slices of French toast resemble cr&#232;me br&#251;l&#233;e. Start them soaking the night before, then pop them in the oven in the morning for one of the most decadent brunches imaginable. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
This rich, crackling-coated pork roast has the all the intense garlic, lemon and herb flavors of a classic Italian porchetta, but is much simpler to make (case in point: you don&#8217;t need to de-bone a whole pig). (Photo: The New York Times)
You make a veggie burger because you want the hamburger experience without the meat. This one delivers. (Photo: The New York Times)
This silky, luscious and very classic custard can be used as the base for any ice cream flavor you can dream up. These particular proportions of milk and cream to egg yolk will give you a thick but not sticky ice cream that feels decadent but not heavy. (Photo: The New York Times)
This moist loaf, made with olive oil and yogurt, is less sweet and more complexly flavored than most zucchini breads. Grated lemon zest gives a gentle brightness, while brown sugar adds a caramel sweetness, and cinnamon makes it spicy and rich. Serve slices plain or buttered, or spread thickly with cream cheese for a more tangy and luscious variation. (Photo: Sasha Maslov for The New York Times)
This light and refreshing potato salad is the antithesis of the usual, creamy, mayonnaise-based recipes. The mint and scallion add a bright, herbal flavor while the sprinkle of chile lends a kick. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
These buttery, shortbread-like cookies have a particularly crunchy texture that comes from clarified butter. If you&#8217;ve never clarified butter, this recipe is a good place to start, and the process is extremely simple (though you do have to plan it several hours ahead). If you&#8217;re not a lavender fan, feel free to leave it out. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Minced anchovies and garlic add a complex salinity to seared salmon, enriching and deepening its flavor. To get the most out of them, the anchovies and garlic are mashed into softened butter, which is used in two ways: as a cooking medium and as a sauce. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Your typical sheet-pan chicken recipe roasts everything together on a pan at once. This version pairs potatoes with the poultry, and tops everything off with fresh herbs and arugula, making it a true one-pan meal, salad included. A savory yogurt sauce adds a creamy touch, but it&#8217;s optional if you&#8217;re not a yogurt sauce fan. Feel free to double the recipe if you&#8217;re feeding a crowd, though make sure to use two sheet pans so that everything is spread out in one layer, which is critical for browning. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
If you&#8217;ve got excellent, ripe fruit, feel free to lay it on top &#8212; berries, figs, poached rhubarb or pears, pineapple, plums &#8212; anything sweet and juicy will contrast nicely with the milky ricotta filling. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A Coconut Layer Cake Recipe From Telepan (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Find out what Melissa is reading right now. (Photo: Earl Wilson/The New York Times)
Mussels are cheap, delicious and relatively fun to eat: saline, mild and plump little bites. They are also extremely easy to cook, especially if they&#8217;ve been farmed (most mussels you find in markets have been). Just give them a good rinse, and they are ready to go. Here the treatment heads in the general direction of Thailand, offering a sauce of coconut milk, lemon grass, garlic and chiles that perfectly frames the sweetness of the meat. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Melissa Clark explains why you should be cooking with ancient and heirloom grains right now. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Pork griot (pronounced gree-oh) is one of Haiti&#8217;s most loved dishes, and it&#8217;s easy to see why. Big chunks of pork shoulder are marinated in citrus and Scotch bonnet chiles, then simmered until very tender before being fried crisp and brown. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
To my delight, the pastry chef Larissa Raphael&#8217;s coconut layer cake, served at Telepan, is as classic as they come, just better than most. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A good cook needs an assortment of chicken dishes to fall back on. Aside from roasting or frying (and in addition to grilling), braising chicken is a simple technique to master. Chicken thighs make the best braises; use skin-on bone-in thighs for the best flavor. Though it could be done on the stovetop, this dish is oven-braised. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A feta brine can improve your roast chicken. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Traditional lemon bars balance the tangy sweetness of lemon curd with a rich shortbread crust. This recipe adds extra notes of flavor to the mix: the compelling bitterness of good olive oil and a touch of sea salt sprinkled on top. Click to read the complete recipe. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
If you&#8217;ve never made chutney, you might think it to be one of those long-simmering, involved recipes that take the better part of a day. Really, making chutney is no harder than making applesauce. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
This is a layer cake with sophisticated flavors, fit for a grown-up&#8217;s birthday celebration but sure to be devoured by party guests of all ages. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
This casserole may upset some mashed potato purists, but take heart: one bite and they'll be won over. The genius of this recipe, besides its utter deliciousness, is that it can be made the day before, or even two. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
In this savory, satisfying dinner, finely ground polenta and grated butternut squash are cooked together in one pot, the squash adding sweetness to the savory cornmeal. Then browned sausages and onions seasoned with rosemary and fennel seeds are spooned on top to round out the meal. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
This lightly sweet cornbread has a crunchy, buttery crust, which comes from baking it in a hot skillet. If you have a cast-iron pan, this is the time to use it. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
In Provence, the garlic-infused mayonnaise called aioli is typically served with a platter of raw and boiled vegetables and sometimes fish. With its intense creamy texture and deep garlic flavor, it turns a humble meal into a spectacular one. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Pumpkin pie made with canned pumpkin is all well and good, but pumpkin pie made with fresh butternut squash pur&#233;e is even better. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Easy, healthful and infinitely adaptable, grain bowls are equally ideal for feeding a family (picky eaters can build it to suit their own tastes) and using up leftovers in the fridge. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Essential roast turkey. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Garlicky, gingery and as spicy as you dare to make it, this Asian-influenced pan-fried noodle dish comes together in minutes. Most of the ingredients are pantry staples, which means you can make it whenever you need a comforting noodle dish that comes with a bite. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
A chile-flecked, honey-imbued marinade spiked with fresh citrus juice gives this chicken its fiery, syrupy character. Dates and carrots give the sauce texture and additional sweetness while a garnish of fresh herbs and pistachio nuts lends freshness and crunch. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
You probably already have a favorite pantry pasta dish that you habitually whip up when there&#8217;s nothing in the house for dinner. Next time, try this one instead. It has all the usual players &#8211; olive oil, Parmesan, flaky sea salt &#8212; along with fried lemons for brightness and chile flakes for heat. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Roasting brussels sprouts in schmaltz &#8212; rendered poultry fat &#8212;gives them an incredibly nutty richness that you can&#8217;t get from any other fat. (Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times)
Cumin Lamb Stir-Fry by Melissa Clark | Photo: Andrew Scrivani for The New York Times
Follow On

In this recipe, I use toasted croissants, which makes the casserole particularly buttery and rich. Other than that, I stick close to the classic combination of sausage and Gruyère. But feel free to play around and substitute cooked bacon or cubed ham for the sausage, and another kind of cheese for the Gruyère. You can add sautéed or roasted vegetables if you like (spinach, mushrooms, cherry tomatoes), or even small bits of dried fruit that you’ve first simmered in something delectable — figs in port, dried apricots in white wine. It will add a sweet note to contrast with all the savory goodness.

You can even add smoked salmon and cream cheese to a breakfast casserole. But hold the bagels, which are too dense to absorb enough custard. They’ll be there when you want them at another festive brunch.
