As the final buzzer sounded in their four-overtime loss to the Detroit Pistons late Friday night, it was almost as if the Chicago Bulls were losing two games in the standings at once.

Less than 24 hours later, they seemed to be sleepwalking on the court at Madison Square Garden, tired shadows of their usual formidable selves. It was obvious that their exertions in Friday’s game had sabotaged their efforts Saturday night against the Knicks, who rolled to a 107-91 victory in a game that never felt particularly competitive.

The Knicks improved to 14-14, while the Bulls dropped to 15-10.

“Obviously, Chicago was completely wiped out tonight, so we can’t look at it any differently than that,” said Derek Fisher, the Knicks’ coach. “But we’ll take the win.”

The Bulls, who had won four in a row before their two-game skid, lost to the Pistons in Chicago on Friday in a game that lasted 3 hours 24 minutes. It was the league’s first quadruple-overtime game since the 2011-12 season. The Bulls then flew to New York and arrived at their Manhattan hotel around 4:15 a.m.

The Knicks, in comparison, had enjoyed a relaxed Friday night. They cruised through an easy win against the Philadelphia 76ers, the league’s worst team, and then took a short train ride back to New York.

It was a bit of good fortune for the Knicks, and they took full advantage. Heading into Saturday’s game, the Bulls had held opponents to a 41.3 shooting percentage. The Knicks shot 50 percent from the field. The Bulls shot 39.4 percent, and many of the misses were unsightly ones.

“From the jump, it got out of hand,” Bulls guard Jimmy Butler said.

The Knicks have now won four consecutive games. Fisher has doled out compliments sparingly this season, taking care not to blow any positive moments out of proportion, insisting constantly that the Knicks need to be better.

“Our goal is not to be .500, so we’re not going to have any parties tonight,” he said. “But at the same time, I think you do have to celebrate the small successes, and I think you do have to appreciate the progress that you do make.”

The Bulls looked spry for about three minutes. They jumped to a 12-2 lead to open the game, forcing the Knicks to call timeout.

The Knicks emerged from that break with renewed purpose and went on a 23-6 run to close out the quarter. The result never seemed in doubt over the final three periods.

Fisher was asked what he told his team during the timeout. “ ‘Wake up,’ basically,” he said.
Carmelo Anthony scored 13 points in the first period and maintained his strong play through the game, sinking tough shots from all over the floor and varying the trajectories of his drives to the basket.

“I’m starting to feel like myself again,” said Anthony, who had surgery on his left knee last season and spent the summer rehabilitating it.

Anthony finished with 27 points (shooting 12 for 20 from the field), 7 rebounds and 3 assists. Arron Afflalo chipped in 18 points. Kristaps Porzingis had 10 points and 7 rebounds.

“I attribute this win to our defense,” Anthony said. “We weren’t communicating those first couple of minutes, and we did that after that first timeout.”
Continue reading the main story
Sports Newsletter

Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week.

The Bulls seemed physically drained. Jimmy Butler played 55:33 Friday night. Derrick Rose played 54:13. Both were back in the starting lineup Saturday.

Pau Gasol, who played 48:03 on Friday, stayed home in Chicago to rest and recovery treatments.

Butler finished with 12 points and 5 assists in about 33 minutes. Rose played just 20 minutes, scoring just 6 points while shooting 3 for 10 from the field.

It was a frustrated Bulls locker room after the game. The players all declined to use their fatigue as an excuse. Butler went as far as to suggest that Fred Hoiberg, who replaced Tom Thibodeau as the team’s coach before this season, needed to be harder on the team’s players.

“I believe in the guys in this locker room, but I also believe we probably have to be coached a lot harder at times,” Butler said. “I’m sorry. I know Fred’s a laid-back guy, and I really respect him for that. But when guys aren’t doing what they are supposed to do, you have to get on guys, myself included.”

The lone bright spot for the Bulls was the play of Joakim Noah, who had played just 25:40 in the Bulls’ loss on Friday. Noah made his first start of the season and led the team with 21 points and 10 rebounds. He had gone 95 regular-season games without scoring as many as 20 points.
