When I think of Sicilian cuisine, the first thing that comes to mind is aromatic wild fennel, its feathery green fronds and unmistakable anise-like scent. Sicily is covered with the indigenous herb, and it is the seasoning of choice for many a traditional dish. You have only to climb any hill to collect it.

Stop at the outdoor market in Palermo, and you’ll also find little bundles of wild fennel for sale, a boon for home cooks who don’t want to pick their own but need them for a variety of simple regional dishes.

There is maccu, a simple, nourishing fava bean soup in which wild fennel is the foremost seasoning besides salt and olive oil. There are wild fennel polpettini, little fried cakes of cooked and chopped fronds mixed with grated cheese and egg.
Continue reading the main story
Recipes from Cooking

    Pasta With Sardines and Fennel

    By david tanis

Download the new Cooking iPad app
visit the app store to download the new york times ipad cooking app

See more recipes

Any number of Sicilian fish soups and marinades contain fresh, juicy wild fennel, used throughout the warm months, while seeds and pollen are collected and dried for seasoning winter’s meals. Some resourceful modern cooks store their wild fennel in the freezer, so they can have it year round.One of the most famous Sicilian dishes that employs the herb is pasta con le sarde, a magnificent concoction of wild fennel and sardines.
City Kitchen
David Tanis’s weekly cooking column.

    New York Strip Steaks Make Great Roasts, Too
    Thinking Chowder? Try an Iberian-Inspired Soup
    Savory Tarts to Win Over a Sugar-Shy Holiday Crowd
    Thanksgiving Leftovers Go Beyond the Turkey Sandwich
    Gluten-Free (if Not Guilt-Free) Thanksgiving Desserts

See More »

These two frugal ingredients are fortified with raisins, currants, saffron and pine nuts, a most felicitous Arab enhancement in a dish layered with history and mingling kitchens. It is an unlikely combination, perhaps, but a brilliant one.

At its best, pasta con le sarde is a perfect interweaving of sweet and savory — the raisins and salt and hot pepper, garlic and onion wilting in olive oil, wild fennel’s grassy herbal fragrance, a funky touch of anchovy and flaking sardine, a whiff of saffron. Tossed with toothy bucatini and showered with bread crumbs, it is a brightly seasoned marvel.

I tasted pasta con le sarde during my first visit to Sicily, a number of years ago, in the dining room of an elegant old Palermo hotel whose glamour had long since faded.
A white-jacketed elderly waiter brought a large silver tray with enough room-temperature pasta con le sarde for a dozen people, from which he served me a portion. I can still see it, golden, glistening and crisp.

Upon my return home to Northern California, where I lived at the time (and where, coincidentally, wild fennel also grows in abundance), I began to make pasta con le sarde weekly, in many versions, based on the memory of that meal in Palermo.

Sometimes I used fresh sardines, sometimes canned. I made it with tuna confit and fresh anchovies. I tried using the frilly tops of cultivated fennel. I tried the tomato sauce version, but preferred it tomatoless.

I even did a version with no sardines, just the chopped anchovy and bread crumbs; it was utterly delicious. Turns out, they’ve been doing that in Sicily so long, there’s a name for it. Pasta con le sarde a mare: pasta with sardines at sea.
